# License Change Dataset

**IMPORTANT:** This is a work in progress dataset that is likely incomplete and should be validated by someone else.

The idea behind this dataset is to use it as a starting point to see if we can we predict the likelihood of a license change for an open source project from an open source license to a non-open source or more restrictive license. The project itself is being tracked in this [Issue](https://github.com/chaoss/wg-data-science/issues/47).

Because we want to do some analysis on the repositories, any project without a GitHub repository has been excluded from the dataset (see section below for more details).

## The Dataset

inputdata.csv

The dataset can be found in the inputdata.csv file. It contains the following fields:
* project: project name
* relicense_date: relicense date
* orig_license: original license name
* new_license: new license name or description
* org: GitHub organization where the project can be found
* repo: GitHub repository where the project can be found
* license_file: license filename in the GitHub repo

The starting point for this dataset came from this [Wikipedia List of formerly open source software](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_formerly_open-source_or_free_software) page. You can find this list converted to a csv file in this folder called wikipedia_list.csv. Because we want to analyze what happens in a repo both before and after a license change, projects where the repo couldn't be found or where there were other issues that made the data suspect were excluded from inputdata.csv. Those issues are documented in a file in this folder called dataset_notes.md. If you want to help improve the dataset in inputdata.csv, the dataset_notes.md file would be an excellent place to start.

## Contributions

This dataset is still a bit rough and incomplete, so contributions are welcome to help us improve it. See details above for ideas about where to contribute, and please following our [Contribution guidelines](https://github.com/chaoss/wg-data-science/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md) including DCO sign-off for all commits.

If you learn of new projects that have been relicensed or older ones that we've missed, please feel free to submit a PR against inputdata.csv with the data. If you don't have time to create the PR, please file an issue to let us know, and we can add it to the dataset.

## Next Steps

This is a very basic dataset that is meant to be the starting point to create more robust data sets. By keeping inputdata.csv simple and limited to the basic information required to know where / when a license change took place, we can easily build on it in so many ways. In particular, it would be interesting to put this data into Augur and GrimoireLab for further study. We can also use the GitHub API to gather additional data as in the example below in the Additional Data section.

## Additional Data

There are some additional files in this folder.

* generate-license-data.py is a script that was used to make it easier to find the date of the commit where the license change occurred. It also serves as an example of how you might use this dataset as a starting point to gather more data that can be used to learn about a license change.
* output.json is an autogenerated file created by generate-license-data.py and should not be edited. This is the output that was used to learn more about each license change in inputdata.csv.
* wikipedia_list.csv is a convenience file where the data from the Wikipedia page was stored that was used as a starting point. This isn't used anywhere else and should not be updated, since it just contains historical data. Any updates should be make in inputdata.csv.

